# Wine

Wine Basics

This section is a study at your own pace section that will allow you to expand your wine knowledge. It covers basic grape varieties, how to taste wine, how to match wine with food, and a vocabulary section. You’re encouraged to constantly improve your wine knowledge and expand your pallet.

What is wine?

Wine is the fermented juice of grapes. Fermentation is a metabolic process in which an organism converts a carbohydrate, such as starch or a sugar, into an alcohol or an acid. For example, yeast performs fermentation to obtain energy by converting sugar into alcohol. Basically fermentation; for the sake of wine; is the process by which the grape juice’s contents and sugar turns into wine . The formula is simple:
Sugar + Yeast = Alcohol + Carbon Dioxide (CO2).

Sugar is naturally present in all ripe fruit. Yeasts are micro-organisms in the fungus family that metabolize sugar and convert it into alcohol. They occur naturally in the environment, usually sticking to the waxy, white bloom on the grape skin. Fermentation is the process by which the yeasts convert the sugar into alcohol. Carbon dioxide is a natural byproduct of this conversion, and is usually allowed to dissipate into the air (except in the case of champagne and sparkling wine, where the gas is retained in a special process).

Most major wine grapes belong to one species, the European grape vine, called Vitis Vinifera. This species includes many hundreds of different varieties – both red and white. There are other grape species used for winemaking, including the variety native to America, Vitis Labrusca, grown mainly on East coast. However, vinifera wines are the most highly regarded for winemaking.

Wines are named and labeled in one of the following ways:
 Grape variety (“varietal wines”) – These are wines that are named for the grape used to make them. There are varieties of grapes just like there are varieties of apples and pears. Some of their names are familiar, such as Chardonnay and Cabernet Sauvignon. “Varietal wines” are wines where the grape variety is named as an indicator of style.

Varietal labeling is most common in the U.S. and most southern hemisphere wine-producing countries (e.g., Australia, Chile, etc.). In addition to the grape variety, the wine label includes the producer (winery) name.
 Appellation (“regional wines”) – An appellation is the name of a wine-growing region, such as Bordeaux or Barolo, that is also applied to the wines made there. Most European appellations regulate the style of wines that may be made very strictly, controlling which grapes may be grown and setting minimum quality standards. This type of labeling is most common in European wine-producing countries (e.g., France, Italy, etc.). In addition to the appellation, the wine label includes the producer (winery) name.
 Proprietary name – Some wines are given a fictitious brand name, such as Thunderbird or Opus One, rather than a grape or appellation name.
 Generic name – Generic labeling can be very confusing to consumers. Many inexpensive American wines use classic wine appellation names for wines that aren’t actually from those regions, like California Chianti or Chablis. Generic labeling is often used for basic-quality bulk wines sold in jugs or bag-in-a-box packages. The taste and price of these wines rarely compete with the genuine article for which they’re named.
Wine is available in a bewildering variety of colors, flavors and textures. Understanding which characteristics vary based on which factors can help make shopping for wine less stressful. Every single difference between one wine and another can be traced back to one of the following categories:

FACTORS DETERMINED BY GEOGRAPHY:

VINEYARD SITE
• DRAINAGE (soil texture and structure, depth of water table, etc…)
• SOIL CHARACTERISTICS (fertility, composition, pH, etc…)
• LANDSCAPE (topography, hillside slopes, sun exposure, etc…)

CLIMATE
• LATITUDE (length of days and seasons, total sunshine, etc…)
• INSULATING BODIES OF WATER (oceans, lakes, rivers, etc…)
• LARGE SCALE RELIEF FEATURES (mountains, valleys, etc…)

WEATHER
• UNIQUE CONDITIONS OF INDIVIDUAL VINTAGE YEAR (spring frost, summer drought, rain at harvest, etc…)

FACTORS DETERMINED BY MAN:
GRAPE VARIETY
• GRAPE VARIETIES HAVE DISTINCTIVE FLAVORS AND COLORS
• SUGAR/ACID RATIO AT HARVEST DETERMINES BODY AND STYLE
• DIFFERENT GRAPES HAVE DIFFERENT SOIL AND CLIMATE AFFINITIES

VITICULTURE or GRAPE GROWING
• PRUNING / VINE TRAINING (yield controls, trellising, etc…)
• PLANTING / SPACING (rootstocks, vine density, etc…)
• MAINTAINING VINE HEALTH (fighting pests, diseases, etc…)

VINIFICATION or WINE MAKING
• FRUIT HANDLING (fruit selection, pressing, destemming, etc…)
• FERMENTATION (yeast selection, temperature control, etc…)
• MATURATION AND FINISHING (barrel ageing, filtration, etc…)

GRAPE VARIETIES
Grape varieties differ from each other in many ways: • Skin color and unique aromatics • Berry size and skin thickness.
• Basic relationship of acid to sugar at ripeness.
• Affinities for particular soil types and climate conditions.

There are several hundred grape varieties within the Vitis Vinifera species. Luckily for us, only a dozen or so are of international significance. Some grape varieties have a historically demonstrated track record for producing flavorful wines of high quality. Most of these famous grape varieties are originally from France, since the French were the first to breed vines for quality rather than quantity of fruit. Of the quality wines we see in restaurants and stores, about three quarters are made from only six of these top quality grape varieties. The major grapes are 3 whites and 3 reds. Each of these has a basic flavor profile which can be recognized in most of its incarnations from around the world. Learning these six flavor profiles can help you decode almost any wine list:

W H I T E G R A P E S B O D Y R E D G R A P E S
Riesling  
(REES-ling)
High Acidity / Never Oaked
Classic Flavors: Green Apple,
Peach LIGHT Pinot Noir
(PEE-no-NWAHR)
High Acidity / Often Oaked
Classic Flavors: Cranberry, Earthy
Sauvignon Blanc
(Sow-veen-yoan BLAHNK)
High Acidity / Sometimes Oaked
Classic Flavors: Citrus, Green Herbs MEDIUM Merlot
(murr-LOW)
Medium Acidity / Often Oaked
Classic Flavors: Berry, Plum
Chardonnay
(shahr-duh-NAY)
Medium Acidity / Often Oaked
Classic Flavors: Apple Pie,
Pineapple FULL Cabernet Sauvignon
(Cab-uhr-NAY sow-veen-Yoan)
Low Acidity / Often Oaked
Classic Flavors: Cherry, Cocoa

As you learn more about wine, you’ll discover that using these six grapes as a style template can help you communicate about all the others. For example, an unfamiliar grape like Viognier might seem less scary to a guest if you can communicate that its body and acidity will be similar to Chardonnay, but with flavors like melons and honeysuckle. A few of the most important grapes for you to know about are:

White Varietal Characteristics
Chardonnay [shar-dun-nay] As Cabernet Sauvignon is the king of reds, so is Chardonnay the king of white wines, for it makes consistently excellent, rich and complex whites. This is an amazingly versatile grape that grows well in a variety of locations throughout the world. In Burgundy, it is used for the exquisite whites, such as Montrachet, Meursault and PouillyFuisse, and true Chablis; in Champagne it turns into Blanc de Blancs. Among the many other countries that have caught Chardonnay fever, Australia is especially strong. Though there is a Maconnais village called Chardonnay, no one agrees on the grape’s origin – it may even be Middle Eastern.
Chardonnay was introduced to California in the 1930s but didn’t become popular until the 1970s. Areas such as Anderson Valley, Carneros, Monterey, Russian River, Santa Barbara and Santa Maria Valley, all closer to cooler maritime influences, are now producing wines far superior to those made a decade ago.
When will made, Chardonnay offers bold, ripe, rich and intense fruit flavors of apple, fig, melon, pear, peach, pineapple, lemon and grapefruit, along with spice, honey, butter, butterscotch and hazelnut flavors. Winemakers build more complexity into this easy-tomanipulate wine using common vinification techniques: barrel fermentation, sur lie aging during which the wine is left on its natural sediment, and malolactic fermentation (a process which converts tart malic acid to softer lactic acid). No other white table wine benefits as much from oak aging or barrel fermentation. Chardonnay grapes have a fairly neutral flavor, and because they are usually crushed or pressed and not fermented with their skins the way red wines are, whatever flavors emerge from the grape are extracted almost instantly after crushing. Red wines that soak with their skins for days or weeks through fermentation extract their flavors quite differently.
Because Chardonnay is also a prolific producer that can easily yield 4 to 5 tons of highquality grapes per acre, it is a cash cow for producers in every country where it’s grown. Many American and Australian Chardonnays are very showy, well oaked and appealing on release, but they lack the richness, depth and concentration to age and have in fact evolved rather quickly, often losing their intensity and concentration within a year or two. Many vintners, having studied and recognized this, are now sharply reducing crop yields, holding tonnage down to 2 to 3 tons per acre in the belief that this will lead to greater concentration. The only downside to this strategy is that lower crop loads lead to significantly less wine to sell, therefore higher prices as well.
Chardonnay’s popularity has also led to a huge market of ordinary wines, so there’s a broad range of quality to choose from in this varietal. There are a substantial number of domestic Chardonnays, which can range from simple and off dry to more complex and sophisticated. The producer’s name on the wine, and often its price, are indicators of the level of quality.
Chenin Blanc [Shen’n Blahnk] This native of the Loire valley has two personalities; at home it’s the basis of such famous, long-lived whites as Vouvray and Anjou, Quarts de Chaume, Saumer, and Saveniere, but on other soils it becomes just a very good blending grape. It is South Africa’s most-planted grape, though there is called Steen, and both there and in California it is currently used primarily as a blending grape for generic table wines. Chenin Blanc should perform better in California, and someday it may. It can yield a pleasant enough wine, with subtle melon, peach, spic and citrus notes. The great Loire whites vary from dry and fresh to sweet, depending on the vintage and the producer. In South Africa, Chenin Blanc is even used for fortified wines and spirits.
Gewurztraminer [geh-Verts-trah-mee-ner] Gewurztraminer can yield magnificent wines, as is best demonstrated in Alsace, France where it is made in to a variety of styles from dry to off-dry to sweet. The grape needs a cool climate that allows it to get ripe. It’s a temperamental grape to grow and vinify, as its potent spiciness can be overbearing when unchecked. At its best, it produces a floral and refreshing wine with crisp acidity that pairs well with spicy dishes. When left for late harvest, it’s uncommonly rich and complex, a tremendous dessert wine. It is also popular in Eastern Europe, New Zealand , New York’s Finger Lakes, and the Pacific Northwest.
Pinot Blanc [Pee-no Blahnk] Often referred to as a poor man’s Chardonnay because of its similar flavor and texture profile, Pinot Blanc is used in the Champagne region, Alsace, Germany, Italy and California and can make a terrific wine. When well made, it is intense, concentrated and complex, with ripe pear, spice, citrus and honey notes. Can age, but is best early on while its fruit shines through. It is a genetic mutation of Pinot Gris.
Pinot Gris or Pinot Grigio [Pee-no Gree] Known as Pinot Grigio [Pee-no Gree-zho] in Italy, where it is mainly found in the northeast, producing quite a lot of undistinguished dry white wine and Callio’s excellent whites. As Pinot Gris it comes into its own in Alsace – where it can be known as Tokay Pinot Gris, Southern Germany plants it as Rulander. When good, this varietal is soft, gently perfumed and has more color than most whites.
Riesling [Rees-ling] Rieslings are distinguished their floral perfume, but after that they vary widely. In Germany’s Mosel-Saar-Ruwer area, the wines are delicate and subtle, with very low alcohol, while in the Phalz they become spicy, exuberant and full-bodied. In Alsace the result is bone-dry. In Austria, the wines boast a variety of ripe tree fruit nuances like White and yellow peach and apricot as well as steely mineral tones and balanced acidity. Because Riesling is one of the grapes susceptible to Botrytis cinerea, it also produces luscious lateharvest dessert wines. As a dessert wine, though, it can be exceptional. Grows best in cool areas that allow the grapes to ripen slowly, so it is also found in New York’s Finger Lakes Canada, Oregon, and Washington State.
Sauvignon Blanc [So-win-yon Blahnk] Another white with a notable aroma, this one “grassy” or “musky.” The pure varietal is found mainly in the Loire, at Sancerre and Pouilly-Fume. As part of a blend the grape is all over Bordeaux, in Pessac-Leognan, Graves and the Medoc whites; it also shows up in Sauternes. New Zealand has had striking success with Sauvignon Blanc, producing its own perfumed, fruity style that spread across North America and then back to France.
In the United States, Robert Mondavi rescued the varietal in the 1970s by labeling it Fume Blanc, and he and others have enjoyed success with it. .
Sauvignon Blanc grows well in a variety of appellations. It marries well with oak and Semillon, and many vintners are adding a touch of Chardonnay for extra body. The wine drinks best in its youth, but sometimes will benefit from short-term cellaring. As a lateharvest wine, it’s often fantastic, capable of yielding amazingly complex and richly flavored wines.
Semillon [Sem-ih-yon] On its own or in a blend, this white can age. With Sauvignon Blanc, its traditional partner, this is the foundation for the sweet wines of Sauternes and most of the great dry whites found in Graves and Pessac-Leognon. Semillon is one of the grapes susceptible to Botrytis cinerea.  
In the United States, Semillon enjoys modest success as a varietal wine in California and Washington, but it continues to lose ground in acreage in California. It can make a wonderful late-harvest wine, and those wineries that focus on it can make well-balanced wines with complex fig, pear, tobacco and texture. When Sauvignon Blanc is added to Semillon, the latter gains grassy herbal notes. It can also be found blended with Chardonnay, more to fill out the volume of wine than to add anything to the package.

Viognier [vee-oh-nyay] Viognier, the rare white grape form the northern part of France’s Rhone Valley, is one of the most difficult grapes to grow. But fans of the floral, spicy white wine are thrilled by its prospects in the south of France and the new world. It is used in the Condrieu’s rare whites and sometimes blended with reds in the Northern Rhone. There are also a variety of bottlings available from others in France.  
Its production has grown dramatically in the U.S. and most are made in a rich, viscous style. It has also been seen more and more blended with other white varietals such as Sauvignon Blanc, Chardonnay, or even Semillon.
In France’s Rhone region, small amounts are blended into Syrah to make Cote-Rotie. The practice is done to soften the syrah and add a delicate floral tone.

Red Varietal Characteristics
Barbera [bar-BEHR-uh] Most successful in Italy’s Piedmont region, where it makes such wines as Barbera d’Asti, Barbera di Monferato and Barbera di Alba. Its wines are characterized by a high level of acidity (meaning brightness and crispness), deep ruby color and full body, with low tannin levels; flavors are supple and berrylike. Plantings have declined sharply in the United States. A few wineries still produce it as a varietal wine, but those numbers too are dwindling. Its main attribute as a blending wine is its ability to maintain a naturally high acidity even in hot climates. The wine has more potential than is currently realized and may stage a modest comeback as Italian-style wines gain popularity.
Cabernet Franc [cab-er-nay Franc] Increasingly popular as both stand-alone varietal and blending grape, Cabernet Franc is used primarily for blending in Bordeaux, although it can rise to great heights in quality, as seen in Bordeaux’s grand wine Chateau Cheval-Blanc. In France’s Loire Valley it’s also made into lighter wines called Chinon. It is well established in Italy, particularly the northeast, where it is sometimes called Cabernet Franc or Bordeaux. California has grown it for more than 30 years, Washington State and New Zealand is picking it up.
As a varietal wine, it usually benefits from small amounts of Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot, and can be as intense and full-bodied as either of those wines. But it often strays away from currant and berry notes into stalky green flavors that become more pronounced with age.  
Given its newness in the United States, Cabernet Franc may just need time to get more attention and rise in quality.
Much blended with Cabernet Sauvignon, it may be a Cabernet Sauvignon mutation adapted to cooler, damper conditions. Typically light- to medium- bodied wine with more immediate fruit than Cabernet Sauvignon and some of the herbaceous odors evident in unripe Cabernet Sauvignon.
Cabernet Sauvignon [cab-er-nay so-vin-yon] The king of red wines, Cabernet Sauvignon is a remarkably steady and consistent performer throughout much of the world. While it grows well in many places, specific appellations are capable of producing wines of uncommon depth, richness, concentration and longevity. Bordeaux has used the grape since the 18th century, always blending it with cabernet Franc, Merlot and sometimes a soupcon of Petite Verdot. The Bordeaux model is built around not only the desire to craft complex wines, but also the need to ensure that different grape varieties ripen at different intervals or to give a wine color, tannin or backbone.
Elsewhere in the world Cabernet Sauvignon is likely to be bottled on its own or in a blend. It mixes with Sangiovese in Tuscany, Syrah in Australia and Provence, and Merlot and Cabernet Franc in South America.. In the United States, it’s unlikely any region will surpass Napa Valley’s high-quality Cabernets and Cabernet blends. Through most of the grape’s history in California (which dates to the 1800s), the best Cabernets have been 100 percent Cabernet. Since the late 1970s, many vintners have turned to the Bordeaux model and blended smaller portions of Merlot, Cabernet Franc, Malbec and Petite Verdot into their Cabernets. The case for blending is still under review, but clearly there are successes. On the other hand, may U.S. producers are shifting back to higher percentages of Cabernet, having found that blending doesn’t add complexity and that Cabernet on its own has a stronger character.
At its best, unblended Cabernet produces wines of great intensity and depth of flavor. Its classic flavors are currant, plum, black cherry and spice. It can also be marked by herb, olive, mint, tobacco, cedar and anise, and ripe, jam notes. In warmer areas, it can be supple and elegant; in cooler areas, it can be marked by pronounced vegetal, bell pepper, oregano and tar flavors. A late ripener, it can’t always be relied on it cool areas, which is why Germany, for example, has never succumbed to the lure. It can also be very tannic if that is a feature of the desired style. The best Cabernets start out dark purple-ruby in color, with firm acidity, a full body, great intensity, concentrated flavors and firm tannins.
Cabernet has an affinity for oak and usually spends 15-30 months in new or used French or American barrels, a process that, when properly executed imparts a woody, toasty cedar or vanilla flavor to the wine while slowly oxidizing it and softening the tannins. Microclimates are a major factor in the weight and intensity of the Cabernets. Winemakers also influence the style as they can extract high levels of tannin and heavily oak their wines.
Carmenere [car-men-YEHR] Also known as Grande Vidure, this grape was once widely planted in Bordeaux, but is now associated primarily with Chile. Carmenere, along with Merlot and Cabernet Sauvignon, was imported to Chile around 1850. According to Chilean vintners, Carmenere has been mislabeled for so long that many growers and the Chilean government now consider it Merlot.
Gamay [ga-may] Beaujolais makes its famous, fruity reds exclusively from one of the many Gamays available, the Gamy Noir a Jus Blanc. Low in alcohol and relatively high in acidity, the wines are meant to be drunk soon after bottling; the ultimate example of this is Beaujolais Nouveau, whipped onto shelves everywhere almost overnight. It is also grown in the Loire, but makes no remarkable wines. The Swiss grow it widely, for blending with Pinot Noir; they often chaptalize, or add sugar to the wines to make a more appealing dessert style wine.
Grenache [greh-Nahsh] Drought and heat resistant, it yields a fruity, spicy, medium-bodied wine with supple tannins. The second most widely planted grape in the world, Grenache is widespread in the southern Rhone. It is blended to produce Chateauneuf-du-Pape
(although there are some pure varietals) and used on its own for the roses of Tavel and Lirac; it is also used in France’s sweet Banyuls wine. Important in Spain, where it’s known as Garnacha Tinta, it is especially noteworthy in Rioja and Priorato. Grenache used to be popular in Australia, but has now been surpassed by Syrah; a few Barossa Valley producers are making wines similar to Chateauneuf-du-Pape. In California it’s a workhorse-blending grape, though occasionally an old vineyard is found its grapes made into a varietal wine, which at its best can be good. It may make a comeback as enthusiasts of Rhone style seek cooler areas and an appropriate blending grape.
Grenache Blanc, known in Spain as Garnacha Blanca, is bottled in the Southern Rhone. It’s used for blending in France’s Rousillon and the Languedoc, and in various Spanish whites, including Rioja.
Malbec [mahl-beck] Once important in Bordeaux and the Loire in various blends, this notvery-hardy grape has been steadily replaced by Merlot and the two Cabernets. However, Argentina is markedly successful with this varietal. In the United States Malbec is a blending grape only, and an insignificant one at that, but a few wineries use it, the most obvious reason being that it’s considered part of the Bordeaux-blend recipe.
Merlot [mur-lo] Merlot is the red wine success of the 1990s: its popularity has soared along with its acreage, and it seems wine lovers can’t drink enough of it. It dominates Bordeaux’s “Right Bank” where it shines in the distinctive clay soil. In St. Emilion and Pomerol, especially, it produces noteworthy wines, culminating in Chateau Petrus. In Italy it is enjoying a renewed success. As a blending partner to Sangiovese in Tuscany it is found in Chiantis and Super Tuscan wines. Ornellaia and Fattoria de Ama are strong examples.  
Several styles have emerged. One is a Cabernet-style Merlot, which can include a percentage of Cabernet Sauvignon or Cabernet Franc and show similar currant, cherry, and tannins. A second style is less reliant on Cabernet, softer, suppler, medium-weight, less tannic and features more herb, cherry and chocolate flavors.  
Like, Cabernet, Merlot can benefit from some blending, as Cabernet can give it backbone, color and tannic strength. It also marries well with oak. Many critics believe Washington State has a slight quality edge with this wine. As a wine, Merlot’s aging potential is fair to good. It may be softer with age, but often the fruit flavors fade and the herbal flavors dominate.
Mourvedre [more-vay-druh] As long as the weather is warm, Mourvedre likes a wide variety of soils. It’s popular across the south of France, especially in Provence and the Cotes-duRhone, and is often used in Chateauneuf-du-Pape; Languedoc makes it as a varietal. Spain uses it in many areas, including Valencia. In the United States it’s a minor factor now, pursued by a few wineries that specialize in Rhone-style wines. The wine can be pleasing, with medium-weight, spicy cherry and berry flavors and moderate tannins. It ages well.
Petite Sirah [peh-Teet sih-rah] Long favored as a blending grape in France and California, giving otherwise simple, light-colored wines more color, depth, intensity and tannin. It is probably not related to Syrah. As tastes changed, Petite Sirah, with its ripe berry flavors and crisp, chewy tannins, fell out of favor. Moreover, the dense inky wines that showed promise failed to improve with age, only becoming more tannic and earthy.
There is also a variety known as Petite Syrah in France; this is related to Syrah.
Pinot Noir [Pee-no Nwa] Pinot Noir is the signature red varietal of France’s Burgundy Region. The best examples offer the classic black cherry, spice, raspberry and currant flavors, and an aroma that can resemble wilted roses, along with earth, tar, herb and cola notes. It can even be downright funky, with pungent barnyard aromas.  
Pinot Noir is the most fickle of all grapes to grow. It reacts strongly to environmental changes such as heat and cold spells, and is notoriously fussy to work with once picked, since its thin skins are easily bruised and broken, setting the juice free. Even after fermentation, Pinot Noir can hide its weaknesses and strengths, making it a most difficult wine to evaluate out of barrel. In the bottle, too, it is often a chameleon, showing poorly one day, brilliantly the next.
The emphasis on cooler climates coincides with more rigorous clonal selection, eliminating those clones suited for sparkling wine, which have even thinner skins. These days there is also a greater understanding of and appreciation for different styles of Pinot Noir wine, even if there is less agreement about those styles – should it be rich, concentrated and loaded with flavor, or a wine of elegance, finesse and delicacy? Or can it, in classic Pinot Noir sense, be both? Even varietal character remains subject to debate. Pinot Noir can certainly be tannic, especially when it is fermented with some of its stems, a practice that many vintners around the world believe contributes to the wine’s backbone and longevity. Pinot Noir can also be long-lived, but predicting with any precision, which wines or vintages will age is often the ultimate challenge in forecasting.
Pinot Noir is a classic grape of Champagne, where it is pressed immediately after picking in order to yield white juice. It is just about the only red grown in Alsace. In California, it excelled in the late 1980s and early 1990s and seems poised for further progress. Once producers stopped growing it as if it were Cabernet, planting vineyards in cooler climates and paid closer attention to tonnage, quality increased substantially.  
Sangiovese [san-geeo-Vehs-eh] Sangiovese is best known for providing the backbone for many superb Italian red wines from Chianti and Brunello di Montalcino, as well as “SuperTuscan” blends. Sangiovese is distinctive for its supple texture and medium-to full-bodied spice, raspberry, cherry and anise flavors. When blended with a grape such as Cabernet Sauvignon, Sangiovese gives the resulting wine a smoother texture and lightens up the tannins.
It is somewhat surprising that Sangiovese wasn’t more popular in California given the strong role Italian immigrants have played in the state’s winemaking heritage, but now the grape appears to have a bright future in the state, both as a standalone varietal wine and for use is blends with Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and maybe even Zinfandel. Expect sweeping stylistic changes as winemakers learn more about how the grape performs in different locales as well as how it marries with different grapes.  
Syrah or Shiraz [shih-RAH or shih-rahz] In the Northern Rhone, (Hermitage and CoteRotie) of France, Australia and on the west coast of the United States – the epitome of Syrah is a majestic red that can age for half a century. The grape seems to grow well in a number of areas and is capable of rendering rich, complex and distinctive wines, with pronounced pepper, spice, black cherry, tar, leather and roasted nut flavors, a smooth, supple texture and smooth tannins. In southern France it finds its way into various blends, as in Languedoc-Roussillon. Known as Shiraz in Australia, it was long used for bread and butter blends, but in increasing number of high-quality bottlings are being made, especially from old vines in the Barossa Valley.
In the United States, Syrah’s rise in quality is most impressive. It appears to have the earlydrinking appeal of Pinot Noir and Zinfandel and few of the eccentricities of Merlot, and may well prove far easier to grow and vinify than any other red wines aside from Cabernet.  
Zinfandel [Zihn-fan-dell] The origins of this tremendously versatile and popular grape are not known for certain, although it is thought to have come from Southern Italy as a cousin of Primitivo. It is the most widely planted red grape in California (though Australia has also played around with the grape). Much of it is vinified into white Zinfandel, a blush-colored, slightly sweet wine.  
Red Zinfandel is the quintessential California wine. It has been used for blending with other grapes, including Cabernet Sauvignon and Petite Sirah. It has been made in a claret style, with berry and cherry flavors, mild tannins and pretty oak shadings. It has been made into full-bodied, ultra ripe, intensely flavored and firmly tannic wine designed to age. And it has been made into late-harvest and Port-style wines that featured very ripe, raisiny flavors, alcohol above 15 percent and chewy tannins. Styles aimed more for the mainstream and less for extremes, emphasizing the grape’s zesty, spicy pepper, raspberry, cherry, wild berry and plum flavors, and its complex range of tar, earth and leather notes. Zinfandel lends itself to blending.

WHY DO THE EUROPEAN WINES TASTE SO DIFFERENT?
Wine professionals are often able to predict the style and flavor of a wine without opening the bottle. One of the most useful tools they use is the distinction between wines made in an Old World style and those made in a New World style.

OLD WORLD REGIONS
• France
• Italy
• Spain
• Germany
• Austria
• Portugal NEW WORLD REGIONS
• United States
• Australia
• New Zealand
• Chile
• Argentina
• South Africa

This difference is rooted in both history and geography. Old World Europe has a cool climate. It can be a challenge to achieve enough sugar in the grapes to produce the high levels of alcohol needed to make full-bodied wine. Old World wines tend to be lighter in alcohol (lighter in body), drier (meaning less sweet) and higher in acidity than their New World counterparts. They also tend to have a more noticeable earthy character, ranging from stony mineral to rich, leaf mould smells. In general, the wine districts of New World countries are warmer and sunnier than their Old World counterparts. As a result, the grapes get riper, with higher sugars and lower acids at harvest. New World wines are therefore usually higher in alcohol (fuller in body), lower in acidity and often less dry (meaning a touch sweeter). As a result, ripe fruit character tends to overwhelm that of the earth component in New World wines.  
The typical Old World wine characteristics of understated earthy flavors, medium body and high acidity are perfectly suited to enhancing food. Sharpness and understatement perform beautifully as food partners, allowing the wines to better amplify the enjoyment of each dish. However, these same characteristics can make many of the classic Old World styles seem unattractive when served alone, appearing sour, harsh, dirty or thin.

The typical New World wine characteristics of bold fruit flavors, high alcohol and low acidity are far more pleasant on their own, very “easy drinking”. Ripeness in the grapes translates to delicious dessert-like flavors. However, these same characteristics can lead many of these wines to overwhelm the palate, unless the sauces are equally boldly seasoned. This can leave the wine seeming too strong, cloying, flabby or overblown. Basic wine characteristics tend to vary as follows:  
OLD WORLD STYLE
• Lower Alcohol / Lighter Body
• Higher Acidity / More Sharp
• Lower Sweetness / More Dry
• Less Intensity / More Subtle
• Earthier Flavor Spectrum
• Moderate Oak Flavors
• Food Oriented NEW WORLD STYLE
• Higher Alcohol / Fuller Body
• Lower Acidity / More Rich
• Higher Sweetness / Less Dry
• More Intensity / More Bold
• Fruitier Flavor Spectrum
• Strong Oak Flavors
• Easy Drinking

OAK TREATMENT - BARREL FERMENTATION AND BARREL AGING
Historically, wooden barrels were the most versatile containers available, used for everything from nails to biscuits to molasses. For centuries, they were the vessels in which wine was made, transported and sold. While most industries have since found plastic and cardboard containers to be more suitable, oak barrels have retained an important place in winemaking worldwide.  
Oak has a number of characteristics that favor its use over wood from other trees in making barrels, especially its unusual combination of density and flexibility. Oak has the tight pores of a hardwood, which are necessary to contain a liquid like wine without excessive leakage. Yet, unlike most other hardwoods, oak is easy to bend and shape when heated. This is essential in the process of barrel making, where wooden staves are bent into a rounded shape and held in place with metal rings.  
Density and flexibility ensured oak a role in ancient wine making. However, oak has remained a central part of modern winemaking due to its influence on the flavor and texture of wine. Oak has very high levels of a phenol called vanillin, which we find to be a pleasing aroma and flavor. (The phenol family of oak also includes another familiar component for wine drinkers, called tannin.) Beyond adding pleasant oak flavors to wine, barrels can also soften acidity, intensify flavor and enrich texture through slow, controlled oxidation.
Oak barrels change the sensory experience of wine in two primary ways:

1. ADDING OAK FLAVORS – Wine stored in oak slowly picks up flavor from the wood. Like steeping a tea bag, the longer the contact, the stronger the flavor. Barrels also gradually lose their flavors with each use (or vintage). Again, like a tea bag, the strongest flavor is in the first cup brewed, while successive cups of tea made from the same bag will become progressively less intense. New oak barrel flavors fade to “neutral” by their fifth year of use. Oak flavors in wine can range from those of hardwoods to toasted nuts to dessert spices, like vanilla, cloves and cinnamon.
2. ALLOWING SLOW, CONTROLLED OXIDATION – Wood is a porous material. Liquids like wine stored in wood slowly seep out, to evaporate into the air of the cellar. If left alone, a filled barrel will slowly grow ullage, or a pocket of air at the top. A 50-gallon barrel will lose up to 5 gallons of wine to evaporation per year. Rapid, uncontrolled oxidation is avoided in winemaking. However, the wood barrier slows the process to a snail’s pace. This allows the winemaker to monitor and observe the changes carefully, deciding when exactly the right balance has been achieved. Slow, controlled oxidation softens and enriches wine, playing down sharp acids and adding a velvety, creamy feel in the mouth.  
   Oak barrels are used in two stages of winemaking:
3. FERMENTATION – Wood barrels, vats and casks may be used as vessels for the tumultuous fermentation stage, where yeasts multiply and feed on grape sugars, converting them into alcohol and CO2. Large, open topped vertical vats are used for red wines, allowing winemakers access to the floating raft of grape skins. Smaller, horizontal barrels are used for fermenting white wines, where only the grape juice is fermented.
4. MATURATION – Wood barrels and casks may also be used during a period of rest for the wine after fermentation is completed, prior to clarification and bottling. Wines may spend as little as 3 months or as long as 3 years aging in casks. Some rare long-lived wines, like tawny port, can spend decades maturing in barrels.  
   The ABC’s of Wine Tasting
   Drinking wine is easy: tilt glass and swallow. Tasting wine is more of a challenge. You need special tools, the proper environment, keen concentration, a good memory and a vivid imagination.
   The techniques of tasting enhance the ability to perceive wine clearly. They’re actually pretty simple and follow logically through a well-defined series of steps. Some of the procedures may seem unnatural or pretentious to the uninitiated, but they’ve been developed over centuries to achieve specific ends. After a while, they become automatic. Swirling wine in the glass to release the aromas may feel clumsy at first, but you may soon find yourself at the table swirling your glass of water.
   Remember that tasting is not a test – your subjective response is more important than any “right answers.” The bottom line is: Wine that tastes good to you is good wine. And no matter how advanced your technique, tasting is not an exact science. Sensitivities vary widely when it comes to flavor and aroma. These differences are both physiological and cultural.
   The goal in tasting wine is not to find the same aromas and flavors that some other taster is describing. If you hone your own perceptual abilities and develop your own vocabulary to articulate them, you’ll not only derive more pleasure from the wine itself, but also stimulate better communication between you and the friends who are sharing the bottle.
   Looking at Wine
   The first step in your examination is visual. Fill the glass about one-third. Pick it up by the stem. This may feel awkward at first, or affected, but there are good reasons: Holding the glass by its bowl hides the liquid from view; fingerprints blur its color; the heat of your hand alters the wine’s temperature. Peynaud says, “Offer someone a wine glass and you can tell immediately by the way they hold it whether or not they are connoisseurs.” Focus in turn on hue, intensity and clarity. Each requires a different way of looking.
5. Hue or true color, of the wine is best judged by the tilting the glass and looking at the wine through the rim, to see the variation from the deepest part of the liquid to its edges.
6. Intensity can best be gauged looking straight down through the wine from above.
7. Clarity – whether the wine is brilliant, or cloudy with particles – is most evident when light is shining sideways through the glass. Each of these elements reveals different aspects of a wine’s character and quality.
   Next comes the swirling. This too can feel unnatural, even dangerous if your glass is too full and your clothing brand-new. But besides stirring up the full range of colors, it prepares the wine for the next step, the olfactory examination. The easiest way to swirl is to rest the base of the glass on a table, hold the stem between thumb and forefinger, and gently rotate the wrist. Right-handers will find a counter-clockwise motion easiest, left-handers the reverse.
   Move the glass until the wine is dancing, climbing nearly to the rim. Then stop. As the liquid settles back into the bottom of the glass, a transparent film will appear on the inside of the bowl, falling slowly and irregularly down the sides in the wine’s tears” or “legs.” “Experts” derive meanings from them as various and profound as fortunetellers do from looking at tea leaves, but in truth they’re simply an indication of the amount of alcohol in the wine: the more alcohol, the more tears. Remember that when you’re considering whether to open another bottle.
   Smelling Wine
   When you stop swirling, and the tears are falling, it’s time to take the next step: smelling. Agitating the wine vaporized it, and the thin sheet of liquid on the sides of the glass evaporates rapidly; the result is an intensification of the aromas. If the glass narrows at the top, the aromas are further concentrated. Stick your nose right into the bowl and inhale.
   There’s no consensus about the proper sniffing technique. Some advocate two or three quick inhalations; others prefer one deep, sharp sniff. The goal is to draw the aromas deep into the nose, to bring them into contact with the olfactory mucosa and thence to the olfactory bulb, where the sensations are registered and deciphered. It’s a remote and protected place, and a head cold or allergies will effectively block it off from even the strongest aromas. But with practice, and keen attention, you’ll learn how to maximize your perception of aromas, and then how to decipher them.
   Wine does smell of more than grapes. Analysis of its volatile components has identified the same molecules that give many familiar objects their distinctive scents. Here are just a few: rose, iris, cherry, peach, honey and vanilla.
   As with color, wine’s aromas offer insights into character, origin and history. Because our actual sense of taste is limited to four simple categories (the well-known sweet, sour, bitter and salt), aroma is the most revealing aspect of our examination. But don’t simply sniff for clues. Revel in the sensation. Scientists say smells have direct access to the brain, connecting immediately to memory and emotion. Like a lover’s perfume, or the scent of cookies from childhood, wine’s aromas can evoke a specific place and time with uncanny power.
   Tasting Wine
   Now comes the best part. You can be mesmerized by wine’s flashing colors and hypnotized into dreamy reverie by its evocative aromas, but actually drinking the wine is what loosens the tongue, opens the arms and consummates the liquid’s true purpose.
   You might think it’s the easiest part, too. After all, you learned to drink from a cup when you were 2 years old and have been practicing diligently ever since. But there’s a huge distinction between swallowing and tasting, the same gulf that yawns between simply hearing and truly listening. Once again, correct technique is essential to full appreciation.
   With the aromas still reverberating through your senses, put the glass to your lips and take some liquid in. How much? That depends on the size of your mouth. But too little is as ineffective as too much. I find that one-third to one-half an once is just about right. You need to have enough volume to work it all around your tasting apparatus. But not so much that you’re forced to spit right away.
   Because you don’t want to spit, not just yet. It takes time and effort to force the wine to divulge its secrets. I keep a pleasant wine in my mouth for 2 to 5 seconds, sometimes more. Roll the wine all around your mouth, bringing it into contact with every part, because each decodes a different aspect of the liquid.  
   Wine provokes sensations, too: The astringency of tannins is most perceptible on the inner cheeks; the heat of the alcohol burns in the back of the throat. The strength of these taste sensations can be amplified through specialized techniques that, frankly, are more appropriate to the tasting lab than the dining room. First, as you hold the wine in your mouth, purse your lips and inhale gently through them. This creates a bubbling noise children find immensely amusing. It also accelerates vaporization, intensifying the aromas. Second, chew the wine vigorously, sloshing it around in your mouth, to draw every last nuance of flavor from the wine.
   Don’t forget the finish. After you spit, exhale gently and slowly through both your nose and mouth. The retro nasal passage, which connects the throat and the nose, is another avenue for aromas, which can linger long after the wine is finally swallowed. You’ll find that the better the wine, the more complex, profound and long lasting these residual aromas can be. With great wines, sensitive tasters and minimal distractions, the finish can last a minute or more. It’s a moment of meditation and communion that no other beverage can create.
